---
layout: page
title: "Problem Set #1 - Regression for Empirical Laws"
permalink: /content/hw/hw1_1/
---

Submit your coding problems in separate folders. If you use notebooks, provide a brief explanation for each question using the markdown functionality. I encourage you to discuss the problems, but when you write down the solution please do it on your own. You can raise and answer each other’s questions on Moodle; but please don’t provide exact solutions. Submit a typed or handwritten solution for problems 1, 2 and 3, and Jupyter Notebooks (and/or scripts) for problems 0, 4 and 5.


## Problem 0: Stochastic Gradient Descent for Hooke's Law (10 points)

In 1676, Robert Hooke discovered the law of elasticity, which states that the extension of a spring is proportional to the force applied to it. In class, we measured the extension of the spring for different weights and plotted the data. 

(a) Read the data from the file $$\texttt{spring-data.csv}$$ and plot it.

(b) Build the design matrix $$\mathbf X$$, the output vector $$\mathbf y$$ from your data, and compute the least squares solution $$\mathbf w^*$$ using the normal equation.

(c) Plot the model $$f_{\mathbf w^*}(x)$$ on top of the data. What is the total loss of the model?

(d) Repeat the same exercise using stochastic gradient descent. Start with $$\mathbf w = [0, 0]$$, and use a learning rate of $$\eta = 0.01$$. Plot the model $$f_{\mathbf w}(x)$$ on top of the data. 

(e) Plot the evolution of the loss as a function of the number of epochs.

(f) Plot the evolution of the weights in the $$(w_0, w_1)$$ plane.

## Problem 1: The normal equation (5 points):

Given the least mean square expression in matrix form: $$ \mathcal L(\mathbf w) = \| \mathbf X \mathbf w - \mathbf y \|_2^2$$, derive the normal equation using the following linear algebra properties:

- $$ \nabla_{A^T} f(A) = (\nabla_A f(A))^T$$

- $$ \nabla_A tr(ABA^TC) = CAB + C^TAB^T$$

- $$ \nabla_{A^T} tr(ABA^TC) = BA^TC + B^TA^TC^T$$


## Problem 2: Logistic Regression (10 points)

Given a dataset $$\{ (x^{(i)}, y^{(i)}) \}_{i=1}^{n}$$ with $$x^{(i)} \in \mathbb R$$ and $$y^{(i)} \in \mathbb [0, 1]$$, we would like to fit a logistic classifier with fitting parameters $$\mathbf w$$, and predictor 

$$f_\mathbf{w}(x) = g(\phi(x) \cdot \mathbf w) = \frac{1}{1 + e^{-\phi(x) \cdot \mathbf w}}$$

(a) Find the derivative $$g'(z) = dg/dz$$ as a function of $$g(z)$$. Here $$z \equiv \phi(x) \cdot \mathbf w$$. 

(b) Find the log-likelihood $$l(\mathbf w)$$ from the likelihood $$p(y^{(i)} \vert x^{(i)}; \mathbf w)$$ in terms of $$\mathbf w$$, $$x^{(i)}$$, and $$y^{(i)}$$.

Derive the equation for the gradient of the log-likelihood $$\nabla_\mathbf{w} l(\mathbf w)$$ (you can use vector identities or get the derivative with respect to one parameter ($$w_j$$) at a time, i.e. $$\partial l(\mathbf w) / \partial w_j$$, where $$w_j$$ is the $$j^{th}$$ element of the vector $$\mathbf w$$.

(c) What is the least mean squares (LMS) update rule to maximize the log-likelihood?


## Problem 3: True or False (10 points)
Determine if the following statements are True or False and provide a brief explanation:

(a) If the linear predictor is overfitting on the training set the training set error is much larger than the test set error.

(b) The purpose of cross-validation is to prevent overfitting on the test set.

(c) A development set (or dev set) is used to prevent overfitting on the test set.

(d) Increasing the amount of data will prevent the algorithm from overfitting. 

(e) Adding a regularization term will decrease the likelihood of underfitting.

(f) Stochastic gradient descent requires less updates on $$\mathbf w$$ to converge to the optimal solution.


## Problem 4: Classification with Scikit-Learn (30 points)

I have provided two files $$\texttt{p2_x.txt}$$ and $$\texttt{p2_y.txt}$$. These files contain inputs $$x^{(i)} \in \mathbb R^2$$ and outputs $$y^{(i)} \in \{ -1, 1 \}$$, respectively, with one training example per row. This is a binary classification problem.

(a) Read the data (you can use [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/)) from the files, and split it into training and test sets. Make sure to shuffle the data before splitting it.

(b) Plot the training data (your axes should be $$x_1$$ and $$x_2$$, corresponding to the two coordinates of the inputs, and you should use a different symbol for each point plotted to indicate whether that example had label 1 or -1, and whether it is a training or test data point). 

(c) Use [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html) to fit a logistic regression model to the data. (Extra credit (5 points): use the stochastic gradient descent algorithm we wrote in class and make sure you get a similar result). 

(d) Plot the decision boundary. This should be a straight line showing the boundary separating the region where $$f_\mathbf{w}(\mathbf x) > 0.5$$ from where $$f_\mathbf{w}(\mathbf x) \le 0.5$$.). What is the test score of the model?

(e) What is the purpose of the penalty argument in the LogisticRegression classifier? Try the $$L_1$$, $$L_2$$ and $$ElasticNet$$ penalties and compare their decision boundaries as well as their test scores.

(f) How does [SVM](\href{https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html) compare to Logistic Regression on this data-set? 

(g) Open ended, extra credit (5 points): search for 3 other classification algorithms that you can use on this data-set and state their advantages over logistic regression?

## Problem 5: Galileo Galil-AI (40 points)
In 1602, Galileo started conducting experiments on the pendulum that ultimately led to his discovery of the relationship between its period and length:

$$T = 2 \pi \sqrt{ \frac{L}{g} }$$

Imagine being in his shoes, except with and smart and machine learning at your disposal. This is an open-ended problem whose purpose is to get you familiar with data collection, pre-processing and linear regression.

Download an app on your phone that allows you to save sensor data. I recommend the physics toolbox sensors suite app which seems to be available on both \href[iPhone](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/physics-toolbox-sensor-suite/id1128914250) and [Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.chrystianvieyra.physicstoolboxsuite&gl=US) platforms. Hang your phone at the end of a string and use it as a pendulum. You can use your charger cable as the string but you might want to put a cushiony surface under it in case the phone falls off the cable. Perform pendulum free oscillation experiments (as Galileo probably did) with different string lengths. Let $$x^{(i)}(t)$$ be the sensor measurement for every experiment $$i$$ with string length $$L^{(i)}$$. $$x^{(i)}(t)$$ can be the angular acceleration if you are using the gyroscope, or the linear acceleration if you are using the accelerometer. We are interested in predicting the period of oscillation $$T$$ from the length of the string $$L$$.

(a) Briefly describe your setup and data collection method. For example, how did you measure $$L$$? How many data points did you use?

(b) Data cleaning: remove pre- and post- oscillation measurements from your sensor data and plot the time series for each experiment $$i$$ (you can do so on the same plot or on separate [subplots](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/_as_gen/matplotlib.pyplot.subplots.html)). If you are using a gyroscope that truncates values between $$0$$ and $$2 \pi$$, process the data to get a sinusoidal looking time series.

(b) Transform (algorithmically, not by hand) the time series data $$z^{(i)}(t)$$ to the an average period of oscillation $$T^{(i)}$$ for each experiment $$i$$. Briefly describe the method you used. (hint: what's the best way to find the frequencies in a time-series data?)

(c) Split your data into a training and test sets, and plot $$T^{(i)}$$ as a function of $$L^{(i)}$$ for all data points $$i$$. 

(d) What is your input $$x$$ and output $$y$$? Suggest a few choices for the feature extractor $$\phi(x)$$ and write down $$f_\mathbf{w}(x) = \phi(x) \cdot \mathbf w$$. Explain the motivation behind your choices. (hint: what happens if you $$log()$$ the data? What happens if you use a polynomial of degree higher than $$2$$? Discuss these issues in the next question.)

(e) Depending on your choice of $$\phi()$$, $$x$$ and $$y$$, use linear regression, ridge regression (with $$L_2$$ regularization) or Lasso (with $$L_1$$ regularization) with scikit-learn and compare your results to the theory. What did you obtain for $$g$$?

(f) Briefly describe whether the data points you collected were enough and if you had to iterate to get more measurements.

Extra credit (5 points): use [LassoCV](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LassoCV.html) to optimize over the hyperparameter associated with the magnitude of the $$L_1$$ regularization term in the Lasso loss function.