---
layout: page
title: "Problem Set #2 - Differential Equations And Probabilistic Models"
permalink: /content/hw/hw2_26/
---

If you use notebooks, provide a brief explanation for each question using the markdown functionality. I encourage you to discuss the problems, but when you write down the solution please do it on your own. Don't use LLMs without explaining how you've used them (if you don't disclose usage, you might lose points). You can raise and answer each other's questions on Slack; but please don't provide exact solutions. Submit Jupyter notebooks (or scripts) for all problems on Moodle on this link: [Moodle Assignment Submission Link](https://lms.aub.edu.lb/mod/assign/view.php?id=2563697) before the due date of February 15, at 23:59pm.

## Problem 0: The Logistic Map (10 points)
Relevant references:
- [This equation will change how you see the world](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ovJcsL7vyrk&ab_channel=Veritasium).

The [logistic map](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logistic_map) is a simple mathematical model of population growth. It is defined by the following difference equation:

$$x_{n+1} = r x_n (1 - x_n)$$

where $$x_n$$ is the population at time $$n$$ and $$r$$ is a parameter that controls the growth rate.

(a) Generate a time series of the logistic map for $$r = 3.7$$ and $$x_0 = 0.5$$ for $$n = 0, 1, \ldots, 100$$. And plot the time series.

(b) Define the feature vector and the output. Build the design matrix $$X$$. Use linear regression to find $$r$$.

(c) Symbolic regression uses a genetic algorithm to find the best fitting equation for a given dataset. It's another popular approach for discovering equations from data. Use [PySR](https://github.com/MilesCranmer/PySR) or [AI Feynman](https://ai-feynman.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) to find the logistic map from the data.


## Problem 1: The SIR Model (10 points)

When COVID-19 hit, the [SIR (Susceptible, Infectious, or Recovered)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compartmental_models_in_epidemiology) model was used to model infectious diseases. It is defined by the following system of differential equations:

$$\frac{dS}{dt} = -\beta S I$$

$$\frac{dI}{dt} = \beta S I - \gamma I$$

$$\frac{dR}{dt} = \gamma I$$

where $$S$$ is the number of susceptible individuals, $$I$$ is the number of infected individuals, and $$R$$ is the number of recovered individuals. The parameters $$\beta$$ and $$\gamma$$ control the transmission rate of the disease and the recovery rate of individuals, respectively.

(a) Solve the SIR model for $$\beta = 0.3$$, $$\gamma = 0.1$$, $$S(t=0) = 0.99$$, $$I(t=0) = 0.01$$, and $$R(t=0) = 0$$. And plot the time series (you should decide what's a good time range to plot).

(b) Define a library of functions using polynomials in $$S$$ and $$I$$ up to quadratic order. 

(c) Use Lasso to find $$\beta$$ and $$\gamma$$. Tune the regularization term $$\alpha$$ (by hand) until you find an equation that fits well and has the smallest number of terms.

(d) Compare the solution of the discovered model with the solution of the original model. To do that, define a new polynomial differential equation that includes all the non-zero discovered terms. For example, you might have an extra term like $$S I$$ in the third equation.

## Problem 2: Brownian Motion and the Diffusion Equation (30 points)
Relevant references:
- [Everyone should see this experiment for themselves](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZNzoTGv_XiQ&ab_channel=SteveMould)
- [The Trillion Dollar Equation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5w-dEgIU1M&ab_channel=Veritasium)

In 1827, botanist Robert Brown observed that pollen grains suspended in water moved in a random zig-zag motion. This phenomenon later came to be known as [Brownian motion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brownian_motion). At the time, the atomistic nature of matter was not yet widely accepted, and Brownian motion provided some of the first evidence that matter was composed of atoms. 

In 1905, Albert Einstein published a paper that provided a quantitative explanation of Brownian motion, and its relationship with the [diffusion equation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion_equation); thus, providing strong theoretical evidence for the existence of discrete atoms. 

Later, Norbert Wiener and Paul Lévy developed the mathematical theory of Brownian motion, which laid the foundation for the field of stochastic calculus, and had a profound impact on fields as diverse as finance, physics, and biology. The equation for a Brownian particle is given by the stochastic differential equation (SDE):

$$dX = v dt + \gamma dW$$

where $$X$$ is the position of the particle, $$v$$ is the drift velocity (due to bulk motion; e.g. water particle drifting with a river flowing at velocity $$v$$), $$\gamma$$ is related to the diffusion coefficient, $$dt$$ is the infinitesimal time step, and $$dW$$ is a Wiener process (a mathematical object that represents a continuous-time random walk). The Wiener process is sampled from a gaussian distribution, such that 

$$dW \sim \mathcal{N}(0, dt)$$; 

In other words, it is a normally distributed random variable with mean 0 and variance $$dt$$. In practice, to generate a Wiener process, you can use the normal distribution with mean 0, and variance $\Delta t$, where $\Delta t$ is the finite time increment. Thus, a discrete form of an SDE is given by:

$$X(t + \Delta t) = X(t) + v \Delta t + \gamma \mathcal{N}(0, \Delta t)$$

We want to show, like Einstein did in the early 20th century, that the diffusion equation models the statistical evolution of the random particles. But instead of doing it analytically, we will use a Monte Carlo simulation.

(a) Generate a time series of the Brownian motion for $$v = 0.03$$, $$\gamma = 0.1$$, $$X(t=0) = 0$$, $$t_\text{final} = 50$$ seconds, discretized into 2000 time steps, for 2000 particles. Plot the time series for the first 10 particles. Based on the plot decide whether you need a longer time series (you can update that answer later)

(b) Use the time series data to estimate the probability density function (PDF) of the positions of the particles at every time step using Kernel Density Estimation (KDE). Plot the PDFs at 5 different time steps on the same plot. Increase the number of particle (e.g. 10000) and change the bandwidth to see how they affect the PDFs. 

(c) Use the KDE data to find the advection and diffusion coefficients in the Advection-Diffusion equation of the form:

$$\frac{\partial p}{\partial t} = - a \frac{\partial p}{\partial x} + b \frac{\partial^2 p}{\partial x^2} $$

where $$p$$ is the probability density function of the position of the particles. For build a library of partial derivatives in $$x$$: $$\phi(p(x)) = [\frac{\partial p}{\partial x},  \frac{\partial^2 p}{\partial x^2}]$$, and an label (output) array $$y = \frac{\partial p}{\partial t}$$; where you have to approximate the partial derivatives numerically. Tips: if you're using scipy's ```gaussian_kde```, you might get an error if all the points have the same position (at initial condition); to address that, you can either add a very small random number to the position of each particle at $$t=0$$, or avoid the I.C. all together. 

(d) Discretize the equation you obtained and solve it numerically using the finite difference method. Compare the solution with the PDF data you obtained in part (b).

(e) What is the relationship between $$v$$, $$\gamma$$, $$a$$, and $$b$$? You can answer this questions by inspection (and by doing some research). 

(f) Bonus: Find the relationship between $$\gamma$$ and $$b$$ (the diffusion coefficient) by plotting them against each other and fitting a model through them.

## Problem 3: Open Problem (20 points)

Go through the list of differential equations in different fields on this [Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_named_differential_equations), and pick one that you find interesting. 

(a) Write a brief explanation of the equation, its applications, and how you can collect data for the variable it is solving for. What would be a good scenario where you would be interested in estimating its coefficients from data? (e.g. finding a spring constant from a mass-spring system, or finding the damping coefficient of a pendulum from data.)

(b) Solve the equation using a numerical method of your choice; and compare the solution with the analytical solution if it exists. 

(c) Define the library of functions (feature vector) that you should use to discover the equation from data. Is there a larger set of functions that you can define in the absence of knowledge of the equation? (e.g. polynomials up to n-th degree, trigonometric functions, etc. In the Lorenz System example, we used general polynomials of degree 2 that contained the terms we're interested in.) 

(d) Bonus: use the generated data to estimate the coefficients of the equation using the [PySINDy library](https://pysindy.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html) that sparsifies the equation using a sparsity regularization term (e.g. L1 norm).

